---
title: LCD and IR support for codplayer
tags:
  - gpio
  - physical hacking
  - hardware
---

As soon as I had honed in on Raspberry Pi for the
[codplayer](https://github.com/petli/codplayer) platform, I planned to
add an LCD display and support for a regular IR remote control.  In
short, make codplayer behave like a CD player.  This had to wait until
the player itself was complete, and progress was then awfully slow
once work started.  Now it's finally deployed in my living room
stereo, so let's have a look at the construction.

Detailed build instructions and code can be found in the [Github
repo](https://github.com/petli/codplayer), currently in the lcd-ir
branch but soon to be merged into master after a few more tweaks to
the code.


The result
----------

![codplayer with LCD](/images/codplayer/lcd-finished.jpg)

The white-on-blue LCD doesn't suit the player, but was the only model
I could get hold of easily.  I plan to replace it with a red-on-black
LCD later.  It is controlled by the new deamon codlcd using GPIO
through [a Python module from
AdaFruit](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_Python_CharLCD).

The old power light is shining bright red (though barely visible in
this photo), now from a LED controlled by codlcd flipping a GPIO pin.
It blinks in different patterns to indicate working or error statuses,
but a solid red means everything is fine.

The old tone control knob controls the LCD contrast.  The volume knob
doesn't do anything yet.  I've considered using it to control the
brightness of the LCD, but haven't yet decided if that's better than
using the remote.  Currently, the remote can turn off the LCD to get
rid of the glare.  (This is a feature borrowed from Cyrus CD players.
My amp is a Cyrus 7, so the remote has a light toggle button which
codlcd listens to.)  This can be extended to instead cycle through
different brightness levels from 0 to 1, using PWM to control the LCD
backlight.

Button presses are recieved by the IR sensor, which is connected
directly to another GPIO pin where a kernel driver and lircd
translates them into events that codlircd retransmits as ZeroMQ
messages.  Right now codplayerd only reacts to simple button presses
for pause, next, previous etc, but adding support for choosing tracks
by entering their number is next on the list.

The LED blinks when buttons are pressed.  The simple way to do this
would probably be to wire it up to the IR sensor, but I'm a
programmer, not an electronics hacker.  So the process is thus:

* IR sensor transmits the recieved button signal to the GPIO pin

* Kernel driver parses the pulses and sends the resulting code to lircd

* lircd translates the code to a button name and publishes it on a
  Unix socket

* codlircd reads the button event from the socket and publishes it as
  a ZeroMQ message

* codlcd subscribes to ZeroMQ button message and blinks the LED by
  toggling its GPIO pin

The benefit of this roundabout way is that if the LED blinks, I know
that the system actually did process the button.  Right now it seems
to only catch every other button press, so that is actually a useful
feedback.  I'm going to look at the reference wiring in the IR sensor
product sheet to see if using that rather than just plugging straight
into the GPIO pin improves matters.  Some day.  Right now I've had
enough soldering for a while.


Building it
-----------

Once, though a combination of naivity and clumsiness, I coated an wall
socket with a thin film of vapourised solder.  Despite that, I managed
to build this without any particular mishaps.

The first step was to experiment on a breadboard, using a second
raspie (and at this point, a previously bought and much too big LCD):

![Breadboard prototype](/images/codplayer/display-prototype.jpg)

This was very useful, as I found out that the contrast control
wouldn't work very well by just hooking it up to the old tuning knob
trim pot.  The practical voltage range is about 0-1.5V, not the full
0-5V.  A simple voltage splitter wouldn't do the trick either, since
an internal resistor in the LCD on the contrast pin turned the circuit
into a resistor grid that just made everything worse.  A friend
suggested using an opamp in a voltage following configuration to
isolate the trimpot from the resistor in the LCD.  (Thanks, Wingel!)


Once things seemed to work, I translated it into a circuit layout for
an [AdaFruit perma-proto
board](https://www.m.nu/adafruit-permaproto-raspberry-breadboard-p-692.html).
It was not particularly fun wiring this up.  If I did this again, I
would rather put the time into learning Eagle CAD and getting a proper
PCB produced.  But hey, it works:

![Testing the finished board](/images/codplayer/control-board.jpg)

At this point the hardware hacking was replaced by coding to build the
codlircd and codlcd daemons to make use of the electronics.


Next, some physical hacking with a drill, saw and blunt tools:

![Top with hole for LCD](/images/codplayer/lcd-preparation.jpg)


After a little bit more violence the board fit precisely into the area
where the old record player circuit board and transformer once sat:

![Fitting the board into the player](/images/codplayer/lcdboard-fit.jpg)


Something was needed to hold the board in place.  A crudely cut piece
of plastic created a holder and lid for the board, protecting it from
getting into contact with the Blu-Ray reader below it:

![Board holder](/images/codplayer/lcdboard-holder.jpg)


The old screw holes that held the transformer could be reused, even
the screws themselves.  As a further bonus, some of the nuts once
holding the record engine engine in place now provides support for the
LCD.  Here's everything wired up and being tested with the second
raspie:

![Wired up](/images/codplayer/lcdboard-connected.jpg)


The final step, completed today, was to cut up the old metal front to
make it fit around the LCD, glue it in place and polish everything.
The final results was shown at the top of the post.
