---
Title: Why codplayer?
Tags: rationalisations, retrofitting
---

If, in the year of 2013, you set out to put a lot of time and Python
and some hardware into building a CD player you have some explaining
to do.  This post sets out the background of the codplayer idea.


Last: the result
----------------

It took a year and a half of on-and-off coding, and one complete
refactoring of the player core, before codplayer 0.9 entered full-time
CD player duties in my living room, looking like this:

!(/images/codplayer/wired-boxes.jpg)

It's now housed more elegantly, as described in a later post.


Earlier: a name
---------------

It's a COmplicated Disc Player, so codplayer.  But the short form also
has the benefit of being unique, and suitably silly for the endeavour.
Naming code is often harder than writing it.


Initially: pop artefacts
------------------------

The concept goes back to a realisation that I probably should start
migrating from primarily listening to music from physical media before
it is too late.  Not that vinyl is threatened, but on that format I
mainly collect second hand pop record from the 80s, and aren't
convinced about buying newly pressed LPs.  The bulk of my active music
collection is thus on CD, and that is clearly unhip.

At the same time I much prefer listening to pop albums, records with a
start, an end, and an internal structure.  On long travels my ipod
might get told to play random tracks, but listening to an infinite
stream of random tracks at home is not my preferred mode.  If I want
that, I put on an [Avalanches
mix](https://www.reddit.com/r/theavalanches/comments/2zj33i/24_and_counting_of_the_avalanches_mixtapes_live/).

iTunes does a half decent job playing albums as albums, Spotify is
just useless at anything but spamming your play queue with unwanted
tracks.  Neither provide any kind of user interface equivalent of
standing in front of the record shelves and deciding what to listen to
based on the physical organisation of records.  That I'm a sucker for
the physical artefact is evident by the four CD copies I have of Pet
Shop Boys *Very*, each one different and bought for a good reason.


The codplayer idea
------------------

The core idea of codplayer is thus to be a digital music player where
the main UI is the physical disc and a good old-fashioned remote
control, rather than having to fiddle with a laptop or touch screen
UI.  The first time you play a disc it gets ripped to a file server,
and subsequent times the disc just identifies the sound files to play
in the ripped disc database.  This enables several features:

* Respecting album boundaries.  My mid-90s copy of *The Rise and Fall
  of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders From Mars* has some B-sides and
  demos as bonus tracks, which are nice to have.  But after the
  closing chord to *Rock'n'Roll Suicide*, there should be silence, not
  *John, I'm Only Dancing*.  Codplayer can force the playback to pause
  there.

* Removing tracks.  Who needs a "schizo mix" of *Just Can't Get Enough*
  on the bonus tracks to *Speak & Spell*?  And while I extol the virtues
  of pop albums, there are some plainly awful tracks out there which
  are sometimes a blessing to cull.

* Symlinking discs.  Now we're into deep disc fetischism, but I
  really, really prefer to pluck the original jewel case of the shelf
  and put the original disc of *Behaviour* with the 1990 Mark Farrow
  typography, while have it play the 2001 remaster.

* Getting a high-fidelity backup of the record collection (not even
  flac! just pure samples and table of contents!).


Triggers and enablers
---------------------

The final trigger to put these sentiments into code was that I was
about to join [Commons Machinery](http://commonsmachinery.se/) as lead
developer.  After five years as a solution architect using Microsoft
Office as my main tool and not doing much coding at all, I wanted to
refresh my developer skills before starting the new job.  This was a
suitable project for that.

At the same time all those cheap Linux platforms were proliferating,
so it was suddenly feasible to have a small, fanless computer in the
hifi rack shuffling samples with Python code.  


Non-tangible features
---------------------

That little Raspberry Pi sounds *brilliantly*.  I was afraid this was
hifi placebo, but the rational explanation is that my DAC can do a
much better job when fed samples over USB than an RCA S/PDIF cable.
On USB it has control of the all-critical clock, but on S/PDIF it's
just a slave to the clock in the CD transport (in this case a
half-decent DVD player).

Finally, the knowledge that all those bits shuffling to the DAC is now
fully under my own control and perform excellently is almost even more
rewarding than the sound itself.
